English (AU) (Spoken) [Manually Transcribed Captions]
github.com/WizardTim/WizardTim-captions
This is the ubiquitous TO-220
through-hole package that I'm sure we're all familiar with.
This device in particular is the popular 1117 low-drop-out voltage regulator
manufactured by ST. And the first thing you're probably
going to calculate when using one of
these
is the thermal performance and so the
data sheet here gives us these figures
for the package thermal resistances. With
this here junction to ambient figure we
can calculate the die temperature for a
given amount of power
or conversely the power at which the
regulator reaches Tj max.
So as you can see calculating the
thermal performance of this package when
free standing
is very easy and the numbers you get are
quite often very close to reality.
But of course the big advantage of using
a TO-220 style device is the fact that
it can be bolted to an external heatsink
which allows it to dissipate
significantly more than 2 watts
or simply just operate at a lower
temperature and extend its life.
So this here is a pretty standard
stamped copper heatsink from AAVID Thermology
and looking at the data sheet for this
we find
a nice little graph here which is quite
common amongst heatsinks
although i wish manufacturers would use
meters per second
not US customary feet per minute.
But using this line here we can find how
hot our heatsink will get for a given
amount of power dissipated with
convection cooling only
or if we have forced airflow we can use
this other line to get a thermal
resistance to ambient figure.
Doing the calculations again but instead
for this configuration
we can easily show that this will reduce
the die temperature
at 2 watts to significantly less than Tj max.
So doing this kind of thermal design
calculations with this TO-220
through-hole part is pretty easy and
straightforward.
Instead you should be worrying about
making sure you have the correct
mounting force
or whether or not you're placing it next
to a wet electrolytic capacitor.
But what about this same 1117
regulator but instead from
Advanced Monolithic Systems and in this
SOT-223 package
how do we do the same calculations. Well
looking at the datasheet again we see
thermal resistance numbers
but with this asterisk; thermal
resistance depends on the size of copper
area connected to the case tab.
Okay that makes sense seeing as the
tab is soldered to the PCB
and it's not like there's a bolt hole
you can connect the heatsink to.
And so if we look further we see that
they've given us a nice little table of
thermal resistances
for several different sizes of copper
areas and well this looks easy enough to
calculate
and it actually is. However, the problem
comes when you actually come to apply
this
let's look here at this PCB and well
what here counts towards our copper area
what
parts will actually provide useful heat
sinking
I mean all this copper here in the
ground plate probably counts right?
There's only these little tiny gaps
between the copper areas here between
the power rail and the ground plane
and well I see regulators on PCBs like
this all the time
that just use the minimum footprint size
with the ground plane surrounding it
I mean the thermal resistance of the pcb
can't be that bad right?
I mean look here we've got copper at 400
watts per meter kelvin and
going down, oh, ohhhhhh...
okay yeah this might be a problem.
So
this here is a PCB I designed back in
I made it for fun to see if I could make
my own multiplexed LED matrix
and I'm pretty proud of it I was even
able to get the entire LED matrix on
one layer because I used the LED leads
themselves as jumpers across the common anode lines
useful little trick for you however
today we're interested in it because on
the back of it we have the same
AMS1117 regulator with a nice
little PCB heatsink.
Now at full brightness this regulator
dissipates
less than a quarter of a watt so this
heatsink is plenty big enough.
However I have here a spare PCB that
I've repurposed as a thermal test board
and I've been
abusing it just a little bit. By the way
if you've ever wondered what happens to
a 1206
quarter watt resistor when you put
several watts through it
for a little bit too long yeah don't do it.
So we're going to use this
PCB
to test our theory to see whether or not
these little gaps actually do anything
currently I have the board under the
thermal camera now
and I've got the output loaded down so
it will dissipate about one and a
quarter watts
and when we turn it on we instantly see
the temperature rise.
Okay now that it's reached steady state
we can clearly see the outline of that
copper area directly connected to the
package tab
so unfortunately that means the
temperature drop across this little gap
here is
rather significant so that's definitely
going to have an effect on how much heat
is conducted into this ground plane and
it's probably not as much as I would
have liked.
And of course if we push this
device even further
to dissipate several watts we can see
this little heatsink is never gonna save it.
And so this brings us to the part where
I screwed it all up with my thermal
design and
roasted some LEDs. This here
is a modular LED panel I designed back
in 2018
before I had a thermal camera and before
I knew
these gaps were a big problem for SMT design.
This thing is pretty simple it
takes 12 volts and steps it down to a
constant current for the LEDs
with near zero flicker and the
brightness is controlled with this
potentiometer.
I actually use three of these panels on
a shared heatsink above me
for filming and reference photography
and at
10 watts per panel I get about a
1,000 lux here with them all at 50%
which is more than enough. So overall I'm
happy with them and all of the files are
on GitHub if you're interested
although you might not want to use them
after I show you the problem it has.
If we look here at the LED side of the
traces
we see the pads of the LEDs are
connected to these big traces
and when designing it I paid extra
special attention
to length matching these traces to
equally drive the LEDs.
But I just assume these little gaps here
between the traces in the ground plane
wouldn't be a big contributor to thermal
problems
I even had plenty of vias to transfer
heat to the other side of the board
but again here I have the same problem
with traces and gaps in the ground plane.
I was assuming that this would be enough
to transfer
heat out of the PCB and into the
heatsink
and well I was kind of correct it
doesn't instantly catch fire
but, I definitely could have done a lot
better and not needed to actively cool
the heatsink
if I had designed it just a little
different.
So I have the LED side of the PCB
now under the thermal
camera and
turning it on yeah we see the gaps are
definitely a problem here as well.
And now at steady state we can see this
thing has
big problems running at 100%. Now remember
this thermal camera
can only show us the temperature of the
top of the phosphor of this LED
and that's at 112 °C that's
not the die temperature
the die temperature is
definitely over Tj max which is 115 °C
so this LED is definitely having a short life.
And again we see the heat isn't
conducted very well across this gap, heat
is still
transferred but it's nowhere near as
good as it could be
taking a look at the other side of the
PCB now
and we can see the vias are doing a
great job at transferring heat through
the PCB to the other side
however we have the same problem.
And this side we're relying on the copper
area
to spread out the heat so it can be
transferred through more surface area to
the heatsink and it's definitely not
doing a good job at that.
So I hope you've learned something
useful here so you don't have to go
through the same mistakes i did to learn
this.
So as always thanks for watching.     :)